----- METADATA START -----
Title: Dispersion Modeling of Accidental Release of Propane and Butane: Case Studies of Some Locations in Lagos, Nigeria
Authors: Olumuyiwa M. Joseph, Almoruf O. F. Williams
Publication Date: August 2022
Reference Link: https://doi.org/10.2118/211935-MS
----- METADATA END -----



Abstract


This paper presents the study of the dispersion modeling of accidental release of propane and butane using three locations in Lagos as case studies. The first case scenario was an actual incident while the other two were hypothetical case scenarios. In this research work, the purpose is to predict and evaluate the dispersion behaviour of the accidental releases of propane and butane using the Areal Location of Hazardous Atmosphere (ALOHA) modeling software, developed and made freely available by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), along with Google Earth Pro mapping software which is also freely available. The modelling approach is applied to three (3) different study areas in Lagos: Propane Tanker along Iju Ishaga Road, Butane Cylindrical Tank at ABC Refilling Plant along Ikorodu Road and Butane Spherical Storage Tank at XYZGas Terminal in Apapa. The overall modelling study is concentrated on three (3) different hazardous scenarios of interest – flammable area of vapour cloud, blast area from vapour cloud explosion (uncongested) and blast area from vapour cloud explosion (congested). The flammability (flash fire) and overpressure (blast force) hazards considered in this study were modeled using the aforementioned free software. Primarily, the threat zones generated by ALOHA for separate scenarios were mapped on their respective location maps in order to evaluate the location of the dispersion plumes. For the hypothetical release scenarios considered, the dispersion modeling results showed that the Case 3 (XYZGas LPG Terminal in Apapa) has the most impacted areas for the red, orange and yellow threat zones with respect to buildings, institutions, shops, companies, streets, roads, etc. For the first study area, the results predicted the reported impact of the damaging effects for the Scenario C release. For the second study area, the results show that no threat zones are generated for the uncongested overpressure of Secnario B release. The kind of analysis and results obtained from this study would prove beneficial to the emergency planners and responders such as Lagos State Emergency Response Agency specialized in these study areas to help minimize the impacts of these dangerous releases and plan for safety decisions and mitigation techniques to be implemented where appropriate.




Keywords:
liquefied natural gas,
north america government,
downstream oil & gas,
software,
united states government,
modeling & simulation,
gas monetization,
lng,
hsse standard,
chemical spill


Subjects: 
Natural Gas Conversion and Storage,
HSSE & Social Responsibility Management,
Environment,
Professionalism, Training, and Education,
Information Management and Systems,
Liquified natural gas (LNG),
HSSE standards, regulations and codes,
Oil and chemical spills,
Communities of practice,
Knowledge management




Introduction


Industrial materials can be hazardous because of their inherent toxicity or flammabilitynature. Hazardous chemical release which could be accidental or due to improper handling of the chemical by personnel, is a serious threat to the public, primarily to human health, safety and sometimes, to asset depending on th chemical released (Ilić, et al, 2019). Consequently, there has been a growing concern when these materials are released into the environment due to process mal operation or sabotage. Thus, the work presented here focuses on the accidental release scenarios of the flammable substances, propane/butane either due to leaking of gas cylinders/pipes or rupture of gas tankers, thereby causing environmental disasters, notably fires and explosions with the consequent fatalities and significant destruction of assets/valuables and properties.


The major components of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) are propane and butane. They are categorically under the natural gas, a type of fossil fuel; coal and oil being the other types (Christina, 2019). It is well known (Mike, 2018; Leadership, 2018; Ogbette et al, 2018; Nathaniel, 2020 and This Day, 2020) that there have been several occurrences of fire and explosion incidents resulting from the accidental release of propane/butane (LPG) during handling, transportation or from storage tanks in the country. It is therefore of utmost necessity to prevent or mitigate the incidents in order to minimize its impacts to lives and built assets. One of the steps that can be taken in this regard is to routinely carry out risk assessment and implement mitigation measures to prevent the accidental releases of propane/butane, and in the event of a release, to use available tools, such as presented here, to quickly assess the potential impact and extent, and to effectively plan for emergency respons.


Dispersion is an air-driven phenomenon that describes the diffusion and transport of pollutant gases released from one location to another. Hence its name, air dispersion. The Center for Chemical Process Safety (CCPS) Glossary defines "Accidental Chemical Release "as an unintended or sudden launch of chemical(s) from manufacturing, processing, coping with or on-site storage services to the air, water or land". There was an accidental release of methyl isocyanate (MIC) in Bhopal, India (Bowonder, 1985) which resulted in several fatalities and injuries to many thousands of people, and thus prompted extended public focus of the effects of chemicals launched into the environment. It is apparent that chemical release incidents, either accidental or intentional, can have devastating effects on people's lives and properties.


Owing to the detrimental effects of chemical release incidents, various air dispersion models are developed to curb the problems imposed by pollutant gases, and there are three (3) categories of models available today for use, which are the emergency response models, planning models and research models with their distinct characteristics (Cornwell, 1999). The emergency response models only need minimal inputs from the user, and are able to quickly generate results. Thus, they are more suitable for application to emergency chemical releases since the user is able to make speedy decision about the required input parameters with only occasional need to estimate some critical input parameters that may be required so that results can be obtained quickly. CAMEO (Computer-Aided Management of Emergency Operations) /ALOHA (Areal Location of Hazardous Atmosphere) and ARCHIE (Automated Resource for Chemical Hazard Incident Evaluation), are two of the more common emergency models. Unlike the emergency response models designed to be run during crisis, planning models give practically better estimates of the likely hazardous zones produced by the accidental releases of flammable and/or toxic chemical materials. To successfully use these models, the user often has to check for material physical properties for input to the system. The application of these models are useful during the planning stage o a project, and are usually deployed to check plant layout, establishment of buffer zones with adjacent facilities and/or the public, and for compliance with regulatory requirements. Three examples of the models in this category that are used to assess toxicity, flammability and explosive hazards are: PHAST (Process Hazard Analysis Software Tool), CHARM (Chemical Hazard Assessment and Risk Management) and CANARY. The third category are the the research models which are designed for detailed assessment of the particular nature of a relase incident. Often, the model analysis is site dependent making it difficult to apply the outcome more generally. Apart from requiring multiple programs for complete analysis, these programs are awkward to operate, and the user has to supply siginificant amount of required input data. As a result, the research models are not employed in the assessment o emergency releases. Common ones include DEGADIS (Dense Gas Dispersion Model), SLAB and HEGADAS (HEavy GAs Dispersion from Area Sources) (Corwell, 1999; Tauseef et al., 2017).


In this research study, the ALOHA software is adopted to model the dispersion of accidental release of propane/butane. The ALOHA software is suitably applicable for both emergency and planning release scenarios. The ALOHA software is part of the CAMEO® Software suites developed for the calculation of dispersion of pollutant gases (NOAA and EPA, 1999). It is easy to use and is widely and freely distributed as an open-source software. The ALOHA® software can model both real and potential chemical releases and is generally applicable in planning for and responding to chemical emergencies (Jones et al. 2013). The software is able to produce approximate threat zones related to the hazardous chemical releases, including toxic gas clouds, fires, and explosions. It does this by combining source strength models and dispersion models for the estimation of the spatial extent of toxic clouds, flammable vapour and explosive vapour clouds. A major highpoint is the ability of the software to generate reasonable results quickly enough to be of practical use to responders during a real emergency.


Heavy gas dispersion model is employed in this research work with the aid of the ALOHA software to evaluate and predict the dispersion of the accidental release scenarios involving LPG (propane and/or butane). Heavy gas dispersion model is attributed for use for dense or heavier-than-air gases which exhibit different dispersion behaviours after a release occurrence from their sources. Some pollutant gases tend to slump toward the earth surface because of their higher molecular weight / density than air (the dispersion medium) but the vertical diffusion is inhibited as it moves downward very close to the ground and it tends to disperse laterally and thereafter the upwind and downwind movement follow. This dispersive behaviour is typical of heavier-than-air/dense gases such as propane (C3H8), butane (C4H12), hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, carbon tetrafluoride (CF4), hexafluoroethane (C2F6), etc. Many gases released from processes in the petroleum industries, refinery industries have higher molecular weight and higher densities than air at ambient temperatures. Therefore, modelling the dispersion of hazardous pollutant gases is helpful to predicting the effects of the accidental chemical releases into the atmosphere (Leelossy, 2014). Thus, this research work uses the ALOHA modeling software to estimate the source strength of the release and also to predict the dispersion behaviour of the flammable vapour cloud. In this dispersion modelling, the ALOHA software also generates areas where people and assets may be at risk of exposure using the selected user-specified Levels of Concern (LOC) for the case scenarios in view and calculates concentrations of the flammable chemical released in different scenarios. The outcomes of this dispersion modelling are used to determine the effects of the accidental release incidents e.g. locations of impacted areas in terms of persons/personnel/buildings and more and also the ambient concentrations of propane (C3H8) /butane (C4H10) releases which are the two major constituents of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). The common composition is about 65% of butane and 35% of propane at ordinary temperature and atmospheric pressure (Brzezinska and Markowski, 2017). With respect to hazardous properties posed by these chemicals, flammability is of interest to consider rather than the less severe toxic effect as the effects of the chemical release because their flammable/explosive natures are very much devastating and life-threatening.


The increases in explosions/fires from accidental releases of propoane/butane across many locations in Lagos in particular, and the nation in general, may not the unconnected with the increasing adoption of the subject chemicals for energy utilization in most and major parts of the nation particularly for households and businesses without the expected preventive and predicitive measures in the event of a release incident (Sacha, 2016, Giovanni and Giacomo, 2018). Thus, the purpose of this paper is to report the prediction and evaluation of the dispersion of the accidental releases of propane and butane in the following Lagos-based areas: Iju Ishaga Road, Ifako-Ijaye; ABC LPG Refilling Plant, Ikorodu; and XYZGas LPG Plant, Apapa with the names of the LPG plants masked for anonymity. The findings of this analysis will be beneficial to specialists such as firefighters, industries, schools, environmental organizations, police departments, Lagos State Agencies such as Lagos State Emergency Management Agency (LASEMA), LASEMA Response Unit (LRU) as well as relevant Federal government agencies in planning for emergency response of accidential releases and to help in minimizing the damaging explosive impacts on people and assets.


While a number of studies on accidental propane/butane releases for stationary and mobile sources have appeared in the literature in other climes (e.g. Al-Sarawi, 2018; Anjana et al., 2015; Behesti, 2018; Bendib et al., Bubbico and Marchini, 2008), to the knowledge of the authors, this appears to be the first of such study in the open literature in the country.


Methodology


The methodology consists of the following: identification/description of the study areas, compilation of the required data for the modeling/analysis using the ALOHA Software, and data entry and simulation of the study Areas using the ALOHA Software.


Identification/Description of Study Areas


Case 1: Release Scenario along Iju Ishaga Road, Lagos State


The actual case scenario involves the accidental release of propane gas along Iju Ishaga Road, in Iju Ishaga Area of Lagos on Thursday 24th September, 2020 at 3.30pm (15:30). Iju Ishaga, originally known as Iju, is one of the major neighbourhoods under Ifako-Ijaiye Local Government Area in Lagos, Nigeria. Iju Ishaga is apparently regarded as a suburb of Lagos, that is, it is one of the border towns of Lagos because of its proximity to Ogun State. It is geographically located in Agege, Lagos, Nigeria, Africa and its geographical coordinates are 60 38’ 28" North and 30 19’ 24.8" East. The local government area is populated with over four hundred thousand (400,000) occupants according to the Census held in 2006 (Abiola, 2018). Nathaniel (2020) and the newspaper publication, This Day (2020), reported the devastating destruction of buildings from the explosion that occurred from the lone accident of a gas tanker with at least one fatality and many persons critically injured.


Case 2: Hypothetical Release Scenario at ABC LPG Refilling Plant, Ikorodu Road, Lagos State


This is a hypothetical case scenario that involves the accidental release of butane gas at ABC LPG Refilling Plant along Ikorodu Road, Kosofe Local Government Area of Lagos State. The geographical coordinates of Kosofe are 60 36’ 16.9" North and 30 24’ 25.6" East, with a land area of about 18km2 and a population of about one million according to Kosofe Voice (2019). The accidental release at the LPG Refilling Plant is assumed to have occurred on Tuesday 20th October, 2020 by 11.00am.


Case 3: Hypothetical Release Scenario at XYZGas LPG Terminal, Lagos State


This hypothetical case scenario involves the accidental release of butane gas in XYZGas LPG Terminal, Apapa, Lagos. Apapa is a local government area in Lagos State with a total population of 217,362 people based on the Nigerian National Population Census (2006). The geographical coordinates of the location of the incident are 60, 36’ 16.7" North and 30 24’ 25.6" East. The accidental release is assumed to have occurred on Tuesday 4th March, 2020 by 1.00pm.


Compilation of the required data for the modeling/analysis using the ALOHA Software


The data that are required for the modeling/analysis using the ALOHA software (Jones et al., 2013) include the following: site data, atmospheric data, chemical data, source strength.  Appendix A shows the compiled data for the study areas described above. While some of the data (such as the chemical data) are available in the ALOHA software, others have to be provided by the user for entry into the software.


Data Entry and Simulation of the Study Areas using the ALOHA Software (Version 5.4.7)


The following basic procedural steps were used in the successful modelling of the accidental release of (propane and butane) as distinctly applied to all the scenarios presented in  Appendix A.


The city where the accidental chemical release has occurred and the time and date of the accident were entered on appropriate graphical interface.The chemical of concern for every scenario was specified from ALOHA's library of chemical information.Critical and valuable information about weather conditions/meteorological information were correctly entered for every case scenarioThe source of the chemical release was selected and described with respect to the release scenario in consideration.The concentration of chemical in the air at which there is a concern was chosen i.e. Level of Concern (LOC)ALOHA is then requested to display the intended threat zone for every scenarioALOHA's feature of "export as KML file" was then preferably used in order to display the exact location of each and every threat zone generated by ALOHA on a map.


In the ALOHA software, Level of Concern (LOC) is an important requirement in analyzing a chemical release scenario. One or more (up to three LOCs) must be selected in order for the ALOHA software to estimate a threat zone, an area where the hazard is predicted to exceed that LOC at some time after a release begins. A Level of Concern (LOC) is defined in the ALOHA sotware as a threshold value of a hazard (toxicity, flammability, thermal radiation or overpressure). A flammable Level of Concern (LOC) is a threshold concentration of fuel in the air above which a flammability hazard may exist. Similarly, an overpressure Level of Concern (LOC) is a threshold level of pressure from a blast wave, usually the pressure above which a hazard may exist. In the ALOHA software, multiple hazards ranging from toxicity, flammability, thermal radiation to overpressure can be modeled, but the type of LOC to select will vary based on the hazard. The threat zones are displayed by the ALOHA software in red, orange and yellow, which are overlaid on a single picture. The red zone describes the worst hazard while the other zones describe a relatively less decreasing hazard. The threat zones can also be displayed on a map using a mapping software application such as MARPLOT or Google Earth Pro.


Results and Discussion


Due to file size limitations, only a sample of the results of the three cases investigated are presented and discussed here.


Case 1: Model Outputs for releases - Iju Ishaga Road


Fig. 1 shows the threat zone estimates for Scenarios A, B and C obtained from the ALOHA software. In addition, Tables 1 through 3 are summaries of the results of the dispersion modeling from the ALOHA software outputs.


Figure 1View largeDownload slide(a): Flammable Threat Zone of Scenario A, (b) Overpressure (Blast Area) Threat Zone of Scenario B, (c) Overpressure (Blast Area) Threat Zone of Scenario CFigure 1View largeDownload slide(a): Flammable Threat Zone of Scenario A, (b) Overpressure (Blast Area) Threat Zone of Scenario B, (c) Overpressure (Blast Area) Threat Zone of Scenario C Close modal


Table 1Threat Zone Summary- Scenario A (Case 1)   View Large


Table 2Threat Zone Summary- Scenario B (Case 1)   View Large


Table 3Threat Zone Summary- Scenario C (Case 1)   View Large


Based on Fig. 1a and Table 1, it can be seen that the ALOHA software estimated that the red threat zone, which represents the worst level hazard, will extend 57m in the downwind direction. The orange and yellow threat zones being the areas of decreasing hazard, will extend 88m and 136m respectively in the downwind direction. However, the flammable area red threat zone which represents 40% LEL at a concentration of 8400ppm, is the estimated area where the ALOHA software predicts a flash fire or vapour cloud explosion could occur at some point after the release begins. Fig. 2b and Table 2 show that the red, orange and yellow threat zones extend 22m, 27m and 29m respectively in the downwind direction. In this case, the red, orange and yellow threat zones indicate the areas where the overpressure is predicted to exceed the corresponding LOCs at some time in the hour after the release begins. Thus, the resulting impact could be slight - characterized by minor damages to house structures which may include some window frames damages and/or windows shatters at the specified levels of concern (LOCs). On the other hand, Fig. 1 and Table 3 show the red, orange and yellow threat zones extend 22m, 29m and 59m respectively in the downwind direction. These threat zones indicate the areas where the predicted overpressure LOCs exceed the corresponding LOCs at some time in the hour after the release begins. Therefore, the damaging effects accompanying this particular scenario are characterized as nearly complete destruction or partial demolition of houses, fatalities/serious injuries at the different specified overpressure levels of concern (LOCs). Thus the predicted red and orange threat zones for the Scenario C is close to the destructive impact of this accidental release as reported by Nathaniel (2020). Given the reported extent of the coverage of the actual incident, it is most probable that the flammable area of the vapor cloud which extends up to 136m (see Table 1) must also have been ignited in addition to the tanker explosion.


Figure 2View largeDownload slideGoogle Earth mapping of threat zone locations generated by the ALOHA software. (a) Secenario A, (b) Scenerio B and (c) Scenario CFigure 2View largeDownload slideGoogle Earth mapping of threat zone locations generated by the ALOHA software. (a) Secenario A, (b) Scenerio B and (c) Scenario C Close modal


Fig. 2 shows the map representation of the ALOHA-generated threat zone for scenarios A, B and C using Google Earth Pro. From these figures, it is then possible to visually see any of the areas that would be impacted for each respective scenario. This kind of information is very useful for emergency planning and emergency responders.


Case 2: Model Outputs for Releases at ABC LPG Plant


Fig. 3 shows the threat zones generated for the Scenario A while no threat zones were generated for the Scenario B because none of the chosen overpressure LOCs was exceeded. The dispersion modeling results are summarized in Tables 4 and 5.


Figure 3View largeDownload slide(a) Threat Zones generated by the ALOHA software (b) Google Earth Pro mapping of threat zone locations for Scenario A of Case 2.Figure 3View largeDownload slide(a) Threat Zones generated by the ALOHA software (b) Google Earth Pro mapping of threat zone locations for Scenario A of Case 2. Close modal


Table 4Threat Zone Summary - Scenario A (Case 2)   View Large


Table 5Threat Zone Summary - Scenario B (Case 2)   View Large


Fig. 3 and Table 4 show that the red threat zone, which represents the worst level hazard, will extend 187m in the downwind direction. The orange and yellow threat zones being the areas of decreasing hazard, will extend 276m and 516m respectively in the downwind direction. However, the flammable red threat zone which represents 40% LEL at a concentration of 9600ppm is the estimated area where ALOHA predicts a flash fire or vapour cloud explosion could occur at some point after the release begins.


Case 3: XYZGAS LPG Plant


Fig. 4 shows the threat zones generated for this case. The dispersion modeling results are summarized in Table 5 and 6. Although not listed as part of the Case 3 modeling presented in  Appendix A.3, it is instructive to note that the threat zone for the flammable area of the of vapour cloud (in Table 5) is very much larger than the case for overpressure. The predicted impacted areas (determined from the Google Earth Pro) map are shown in Tables 8 and 9.


Figure 4View largeDownload slide(a) Threat Zones generated by the ALOHA software (b) Google Earth Pro mapping of threat zone locations for Case 3 under hypothetical releaseFigure 4View largeDownload slide(a) Threat Zones generated by the ALOHA software (b) Google Earth Pro mapping of threat zone locations for Case 3 under hypothetical release Close modal


Table 6Case 3 Threat Zone Summary for Flammable Area of Vapour Cloud   View Large


Table 7Case 3 Threat Zone Summary for Overpressure from Vapour Cloud Explosion   View Large


Table 8Predicted Impacted Areas for Case 3 - Flammable Area of Vapour Cloud   View Large


Table 9Predicted Impacted Areas for Case 3 - Overpressure from Vapour Cloud Explosion   View Large


Thus using the ALOHA software, it has been possible to estimate the flammable areas and blast areas of flammable vapour clouds for all the cases/scenarios identified graphically as threat zones: red, orange and yellow. Furthermore, using the Google Earth Pro mapping application software, it was possible to display the the estimated locations of the flammability and overpressure threat zones via KML-converted ALOHA files for all case scenarios. This makes it possible to easily identify affected entities such as buildings, roads, companies, populations, etc which could be potentially harmed upon exposures to the accidental releases of propane or butane for the three cases investigated. The red zone represents affected area with the most severe concentration of the flammable and explosive chemical, which may cause life-threatening effects and fatalities upon exposure. On the other hand, the orange zone is the affected area with less severe concentration of the chemical, which may cause lasting adverse health effects. The yellow zone represents an affected area of decreasing concentration of the chemical, which may cause an average individual to feel notable discomfort, irritation but reversible upon cessation of exposure. These results are useful for risk assessment of faciltiies handling propane/butane and to determine their location during planning/approval stage. These kinds of analys/results are also very useful for emergency response personnel in planning evacuation and mitigation measures in the event of a large accidential release of these gases. It should be noted that because the impact of a release incident may occur as soon as the release event itsef, there may not be enough time for emergency response. Thus in practice, much attention is paid to efforts to prevent the release incident using such methods as inherently safer designs, engineering barriers and operational procedures/management. A general presentation of these methods can be found in Crowe and Louvar (2011).


Conclusions


In this study, three (3) different study areas in Lagos were considered for dispersion modelling of accidental release of propane/butane under three (3) different probable release scenarios which include the flammable area of vapour cloud, blast area from vapour cloud explosion (uncongested) and blast area from vapour cloud explosion (congested). The modelling tool – the ALOHA software. and the mapping application, Google Earth Pro were used in this study. both instrumental in actualizing the objectives of this study. For the first study area, the results correctly predicted the reported impact of the damaging efects for the Scenario C release. For the second study area, the results show that no threat zones are generated for the uncongested overpressure of Secnario B release. However, it was seen that the flammable red threat zone was estimated to extend about 187m in the downwind direction. This is the area that the ALOHA software predicts that a flash or vapour cloud explosion could occur at some point after the release begins. The results for the hypothetical scenario of Case 3 showed that the impact could be very devasting with potential fatalities and destruction of assets around the location as identified by the red and orange threat zones on Google Earth Pro.


The availability of the free and open source ALOHA software and the free Google Earth Pro mapping software should make it possible to readily carry out risk assessment of accidental releases of propane/butane as well as use in emergency planning and response.


This paper was selected for presentation by an SPE program committee following review of information contained in an abstract submitted by the author(s). Contents of the paper have not been reviewed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and are subject to correction by the author(s). The material does not necessarily reflect any position of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, its officers, or members. Electronic reproduction, distribution, or storage of any part of this paper without the written consent of the Society of Petroleum Engineers is prohibited. Permission to reproduce in print is restricted to an abstract of not more than 300 words; illustrations may not be copied. The abstract must contain conspicuous acknowledgment of SPE copyright.


A.1 Case 1 Release: Iju Ishaga Road, Ifako Ijaye, Lagos


Table A.1.1Site Data   View Large


Table A.1.2Chemical Data (ALOHA Software)   View Large


Table A.1.3Atmospheric Data (World Weather Online)   View Large


Table A.1.4Source Strength   View Large


A.2 Case 2 Release: Abc Lpg Refilling Plant, Lagos


Table A.2.1Site Data   View Large


Table A.2.2Chemical Data (ALOHA Software)   View Large


Table A.2.3Atmospheric Data (Time and Date, 2020)   View Large


Table A.2.4Source strength Parameters   View Large


A.3 Case 3 Release: Xyzgas Lpg Terminal, Lagos


Table A.3.1Site Data   View Large


Table A.3.2Chemical Data (ALOHA Software)   View Large


Table A.3.3Atmospheric Data (Time and Date, 2020)   View Large


Table A.3.4Source strength (hypothetical)   View Large


References


AbiolaA. (2018). Iju Ishaga: What to Expect and Know. Prestige MagazineAvailable at:https://www.propertypro.ng/blog/iju-ishaga-what-to-expect-and-know/Google Scholar Al-Sarawi, N. M. (2018). ‘Evaluation of Accidental Atmospheric Releases of Chlorine and Butane from a Mobile Source Using ALOHA and MARPLOT’, American Journal of Environmental Protection. Vol. 6, No. 6, pp 144–155. https://doi.org/10.11648/j.ajep.20170606.12Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Anjana, N. S.et al.  (2015). ‘Population Vulnerability Assessment and a LPG Storage and Distribution Facility near Cochin using ALOHA and GIS’, International Journal of Engineering Science Innovation, Vol. 4, No. 6, pp 23–31. Available at:www.ijesi.org.Google Scholar Behesti, M.H., (2018). Modelling the Consequences of Explosion, Fire and Gas Leakage in Domestic Cylinders containing LPG [Online]. Annals of Medical and Health Sciences Research [Viewed 26 March 2020]. Available from:www.amhsr.org/articles/modelling-the-consequences-of-explosion-fire-and-gas-leakage-in-domestic-cylinders-containing-lpg-4291.htmlGoogle Scholar Bendib, R., Mechhoud, E. A., Rodriguez, M., & Zennir, Y. (2021). A systematic approach for risk assessment in LPG storage tanks area-SKIKDA refinery. Algerian Journal of Environmental Science and Technology, Month edition. Vol.X. NoX. (YYYY), ISSN : 2437-1114.Google Scholar Bowonder, B. (1985). The Bhopal incident: Implications for developing countries. Environmentalist, 5 (2), 89–103. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02235978Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Cornwell, J. B. (1999). ‘Real-time Modelling during Emergency Situations. Is this a good idea?’. Presented at Mary Kay O'Conner Process Safety Center 1999 Annual Symposium Beyond Regulatory Compliance, Making Safety Second Nature. College Station, Texas, October 26-27, 1999Available at:http://www.questconsult.com/Google Scholar Crowl, D.A., Louvar, J.F. (2011). Chemical Process Safety: Fundamentals with Applications (3rd Edition)3rd ed., PTR Prentice Hall, Engelwood Cliffs, New Jersey.Google Scholar Giovanni, O. and Giacomo, F. (2018). The Changing Role of Natural Gas in Nigeria. SSRN Electronic Journal. Available at:https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324459715Google Scholar Ilic, P., Markic, D. N., Bjelic, L. S., & Farooqi, Z. U. R. (2019). Dispersion Modeling of Accidental Releases of Propane Gas. QUALITY OF LIFE, 17 (1-2). https://doi.org/10.7251/QOL1901041IGoogle Scholar Jones, R., W.Lehr, D.Simecek-Beatty, R.Michael Reynolds. 2013. ALOHA® (Areal Locations of Hazardous Atmospheres) 5.4.4: Technical Documentation. U. S. Dept. of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS OR&R 43. Seattle, WA: Emergency Response Division, NOAA. 96 pp.Google Scholar Brzezinska, D., & Markowski, AS (2017). Experimental investigation and CFD modeling of the internal car park environment in case of accidental LPG release. Process Safety and Environmental Protection, 110, 5–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2016.12.001Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Bubbico, R. and Marchini, M. (2008). ‘Assessment of an explosive LPG release accident: A case study’, Journal of Hazardous Materials155 (2008), pp 555–565. Available at:www.sciencedirect.comhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.11.097Google Scholar Christina, N., (2019). Fossil Fuels, explained. [Online]. National Geographic. [Viewed 26 March 2020]. Available from:https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/energy/reference/fossil_fuels/Leadership., (©2018). Nigeria: Gas Plant Explosions. [Online]. AllAfrica. [Viewed 25 March 2020]. Available from:https://allafrica.com/stories/201801160094.htmlLeelossy, Á., Molnár, F., Izsák, F., Havasi, Á., Lagzi, I., & Mészáros, R. (2014). Dispersion modeling of air pollutants in the atmosphere: a review. Open Geosciences, 6 (3), 257–278. https://doi.org/10.2478/s13533-012-0188-6Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Mike, M., (2018). Nigeria, gas tanker explosion leaves 35 dead in Nasarawa State. [Online]. Lifegate. [Viewed 25 March 2020]. Available from:https://www.lifegate.com/people/lifestyle/nigeria-gas-tanker-explosionGoogle Scholar Nathaniel, Soonest: Lagos Tanker Explosion Leaves Carnage Behind: https://www.channelstv.com/2020/09/24/photos-lagos-tanker-explosion-leaves-carnage-behind/NOAA and EPA (1999). ALOHA User's Manual, Office of Response and Restoration of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and Chemical Emergency Preparedness and Prevention Office (CEPPO) of the U.S. Environmental (EPA), Seattle, WAOgbette, A.S., Ori, O.E., Idam, M.O. and Abwage, S.T., (2018). Continuous Gas Explosions in Nigeria: Causes and Management. [Online]. Research Gate. [Viewed 25 March 2020]. Available from:https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328916865_Continuous_Gas_Explosions_in_Nigeria_Causes_and_ManagementGoogle Scholar Sascha, S., (2016). LPG an affordable energy alternative. [Online]. Engineering News. [Viewed 26 March 2020]. Available from:https://m.engineeringnews.co.za/article/lpg-an-affordable-energy-alternative-2016-08-26/rep_id:4433Google Scholar Tauseef, S. M., Abbasi, T., Suganya, R., & Abbasi, S. A. (2017). A critical assessment of available software for forecasting the impact of accidents in chemical process industry. International Journal of Engineering, Science and Mathematics, 6(7), 269–289.Google Scholar This Day (2020). Lagos Gas Explosion and Matters Arising. Available at:https://www.thisdaylive.com/index.php/2020/10/12/lagos-gas-explosion-and-matters-arising/Time and Date (2020). Past Weather in Apapa Iganmu Local Council Development Area, Nigeria - Yesterday and Last 2 Weeks - Available at:https://www.timeanddate.com/weather/@10458942/historicTime and Date (2020). Past Weather in Ikorodu North Local Council Development Area, Nigeria - Yesterday and Last 2 Weeks. Available at:https://www.timeanddate.com/weather/@10482975/historicWorld Weather Online (2020). Lagos Weather History. Available at:https://www.worldweatheronline.com/lagos-weather-history/lagos/ng.aspx




Copyright 2022, Society of Petroleum Engineers DOI 10.2118/211935-MS



