----- METADATA START -----
Title: Corporate Social responsibility: A Paneacea for sustainable Development in Niger Delta Region of Nigeria
Authors: Humphrey Otombosoba Oruwari
Publication Date: August 2022
Reference Link: https://doi.org/10.2118/211934-MS
----- METADATA END -----



Abstract


The objective of this study is to investigate the extent to which corporate social responsibility programme of oil and gas companies contribute to the social economic development in Niger Delta region that host oil and gas operations. Several stakeholders, namely Government leaders, community leaders and other members of oil and gas operating communities in Niger Delta are clamouring for a bigger share of revenue deriving from oil and gas operations in their areas in an effort to achieve a level of socio-economic development that is commensurate with the level of petroleum extraction in their areas of operations to reduce resource curse or the paradox of poverty that host oil and gas companies. Meanwhile, the oil companies believe that through their Corporate Social Responsibility programmes CSR, they are significantly contributing to sustainable socio-economic development of the rural communities that host their oil and gas operations. This scenario presents a gap and a conflict which necessitated an investigation into the study. The methodological framework employed in the study is that of literature review and multiple case study of some corporate social responsibility programe of some oil and gas companies. The study finding indicates that there are CSR programme like road construction, borehole water infrastructure, building of school and health facilities and award of scholarships. This entrench the believe in the oil and gas companies that their corporate social investment programme is more than adequate, however, the indigenous people in the host communities feel that these social investments are inadequate. To solve this problem, foster unity and harmony between key stakeholders in the oil and gas communities, the study concluded that a minimum corporate social investment threshold based on percentage of revenue be set and applied uniformly across the petroleum industry in Nigeria. In addition, each oil and gas company should make an annual CSR report to show the attainment of minimum annual corporate social investment. This will remove opacity and enhance transparency, uniformity and predictability in the CSR programme of oil and gas companies in Niger Delta, with the level of socio-economic development reflecting the level of oil and gas endowment and extraction in the petroleum bearing communities.




Keywords:
responsibility,
niger delta,
corporate social responsibility,
social responsibility,
programme,
community,
development,
upstream oil & gas,
csr,
nigeria


Subjects: 
Sustainability/Social Responsibility,
Social responsibility and development




Introduction


Historically, the petroleum industry has been perceived to be focused on profit maximization, paying little or no attention to its negative impact on communities and the environment. This is inline with Ibibia (2002) observation that the underlying objectives of the principal actors in petroleum investment, (though as divergent as they are varied) can be summed up essentially as the maximization of their respective investment at the least possible cost risk. Environmental protection and sustainable development were hardly within the contemplation of these principal actors. Environmental costs were not internalized into the overall operational and capital cost.


The only contribution to society and the environment has been largely discretionary, philanthropic and mainly about reputation management. It is therefore imperative that Corporate Social Responsibility/Investment (CSR/I) projects should be employed in ways that enhance socio-economic development of communities. This is in line with the principles of social contract which postulates that a business organization is supposed to give to the environment where it is operating. This points to the need to employ CSI strategies that do not compromise the profit maximization objectives of petroleum companies, also known as strategic CSR (Olirtzky et al., 2011). However, the challenge is on how to conceptualize and implement such strategies that are mutually profitable to oil and gas companies and host communities.


Several oil and gas companies operating in Niger Delta have been performing corporate social investment over the years. However, the level of social investment varies from company to company over the years dues to different approach and level of commitment to socio economic development to the host community. Consequent upon the disparate CSR programmes of the different oil and gas companies, the impact on the socio-economic development of the various oil and gas communities is also varied as there are no standardized approach to implementing CSR. Also, since CSR is used as tool for socio economic development, it results in significant shift in the fortune of Niger Delta. Hence it is necessary to unlock the capability of CSR and leverage on the existing oil and gas companies to address the various socio-economic challenges facing the troubled Niger Delta.


In Niger Delta there is disagreement between host communities (communities that host the oil and gas companies) and Federal government on one hand and oil and gas companies on the other, pertaining to the level of effectiveness of CSI by the oil and gas operator in the socio-economic development of host community. The oil and gas companies believed very strongly that they are adequately investing in host community through CSR program. Globally, however, contradictory interpretation and thought on CSR also exist. The growing importance of CSR has made it necessary for every firm to use international benchmark as standard to device their CSR practice accordingly. Dijken (2007) suggests that CSR works well if it creates a "win-win" situation where a company performs well by virtue of operating in a socially responsible way. Baker (2001) argues that CSR is not simply philanthropy, suggesting that CSR initiatives should be tactical and strategic. Thus, CSR requires a number of enabling factors in order to generate sustainable development impact as part of overall long-term strategy. However, it is complex to formulate a broad development plan based on CSR (Frynas, 2005). Against all these complex nuances, the fundamental task of this study is to assess the extent to which CSR has been a vehicle of sustainable socio-economic development.


Literature review


Corporate social responsibility


CSR is a drive towards sustainability this is in line with Emma et al (2010) submission that Corporate social responsibility (CSR) is one of the critical success factors in oil and gas production. It is also the philosophy of sustainable development that many argue is the only way forward for the world economy. In the view of Chikwe (2012), CSR is a set of standards by which organizations can positively impact their operating environment with the innovation potential and creating sustainable economic growth and developments. Social responsibility refers to the obligation of business organisation to adopt policies and plans of action that are desirable in terms of expectations, values and interest of the society. It ensures that the interests of different groups of the public are not adversely affected by the decisions and policies of the business. The idea of CSR essentially means that business organisations have responsibilities that go beyond mere profit making and encompasses voluntary activities and actions that affect people, their community and natural environment.


Adeola (2002) opined that in order to bring about peace which is necessary for economic development and also the successful operations of oil field, the empowerment of the Niger Delta people is important for various reasons. It is a win-win situation and would lead to security of lives and properties. Also, the UN Global compact initiative, launch in 2000, underline efforts aimed at encouraging business participants to improve on their corporate social and environmental behaviour. The global compact places emphasis on policy dialogues as a means of achieving compact goals. The principal aim of the dialogue is to quicken and ensure "mutual understanding and joint efforts among business, labour and nongovernmental organisation (NGO). The objective is to influence policy-making and the behaviour of all stake holders. Also, recall the Millennium development goal 8 -developing a global partnership for development. By encouraging business to implement labour, environmental and human right standards the UN global compact intend to spread the benefits of globalization more widely so as to give capitalism a human face and thus counter the growing perception and disenchantment. Government only cannot ensure peace. Partnership for peace should involve government, international organisation, business communities and civil society.


The benefits implementing CSR


The level of CSR engagement is dependent on corporate objective or ambition, whether the companies regard CRS as a value, a source of competitive advantages or risk management, all of which are intangible asset of modern business. Rushton (2002) noted the benefit of CSR is linked to value and brand so they are intangible asset of company. Welford (2002) opined that CSR can result in enhanced image and value. CSR is linked to competitive advantages and several authors emphasized that taking a philanthropic view of CSR will bring true competitive advantages to companies and their supply chain partners; according to Porter, (2003: 28) the truly strategic way to CSR is to realize that philanthropy in the competitive context align with social and economic goals and improves the company's long term business prospect". In Harvard business review (HBS 2003), Smith emphasized that philanthropy and business units have joint forces to develop philanthropic strategies that give their company a powerful competitive edge.


Draw back/ limitation of CSR


It is worthy of note that lack of national macro-economic planning and management backed by an enabling environment have significant implication for the overall performance of CSR initiative by company especially oil and gas in developing country. In order words, if the macro economy is under performing due to government failure. There is likely wood that the contributions of oil and gas companies to the host communities could fail to achieve the desired outcome. Good governance is therefore an important component of CSR agenda (Ite, 2004).


Sustainability -Corporate Social responsibility


Sustainability demands that the behaviour of a corporation aligns with the broader goals of society, including both economic and non economic growth. CSR requires corporation to identify their sustainability responsibilities and to take voluntary steps to improve their social and environmental performance in harmony with economic/ financial benefits.


Ibibia (2002) opined that considering the underlying aim of the petroleum investor does not necessarily always coincide with those of the host government, environment protection and sustainable development and corporate social responsibility obligations may be viewed with cynicism by the former. Nevertheless, it would be too presumptuous to say that this sceptism drives every petroleum investor to deliberately violate environmental obligations as a technique to boost the return on investments. Even then it may be too presumptuous to posit that, there is a general propensity to comply. However, between these two extremes, there must be a middle ground, where rationality tamed by current developments in environmental laws and policy should result into a new imperative for both government and business. If they are to achieve the much neede legitimacy in the pursuit of of their respective divergent interest. These new imperatives obviously question the mundane view that business and government exist exclusively to maximise the rate of return on their investments.


Sustainable development by Total Energy Company


The term sustainable development has been widely defined as development that meets the need of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Total energy has a adopted a working definition of sustainable development of "achieving a harmonious balance between people's need and earth resources between benefits and costs in both a short and long term"


Total Energy has had a fair share in the demonstrations within the industry as described earlier. Much of its past effort to enhance relationship and deliver development have yielded only little benefits. The company has identified some basic parameters for the development of sustainable community development.


Broadbased development (one not restricted to host communities)Community ownership of its development. This enhances loyalty, sense of belonging through self-development action identification, planning and implementing as well as reducing suspicionCommunity workforce enlightenment. Focusing on key and current issues, research findings and specialization raining particularly important for safe guarding of assetPeople and the environmentAccelerating partnership for growth of peaceful coexistentPoverty alleviation through greener habitsProject sustainable impact assessment- An integration of mitigative measures for adverse impact relating to economic, physical, social, health and developmental issues. This is established with the full participation of all stakeholders especially community representative as early as possibleContinued assessment and dialogue during all phases of project development.All sustainable development programmes project to be subjected to independent verification


Selected action on sustainable community development


Total energy is approaching this from angles of environment, economics and social delivery. From the perspective of economic delivery, capacity building through skill acquisition and enterprise development initiatives are being vigorously pursued. Community Development Foundation at variou levels, one can observe abandoned development project all over the federation from the coast to the fringes of Sahara, in hamlets as well as megacities. Collosal sum of money and other resources have been lost as a result.


Methodology


The study adopted a literature review and multiple case study of indigenous and international oil company and CSR they carry out during oil field development project. As succinctly opined by Baridan (2001), the nature and purpose of study should dictate the method to be adopted in any study. In relation to this assertion, we explored the existing and thematic related literature in order to achieve our set objectives of the study.


Result and discussion


Case studies of the management of local relationship in the development of oil fields the Umusedege, Ogebelle and Asuokpu/Umutu oil fields


A community relation is the process of building and sustaining a good relationship between oil companies and its host Communities in order to provide a conducive environment for its operations. It provides a proactive guideline in ensuring that Environmental, Cultural, Social and Economic issues that bother on the welfare of the host Communities are adequately addressed in its area of operation. Wade (2012) posited that, historically, many oil companies have mismanaged relationships with the local communities and this has led to many difficulties in oilfield operations and the relationships upon which they are built. However, Mart resources undertook the following steps in the development of the Umusadege field:


Build a strong partnership with a local Nigerian oil companyForm integrated field development teams from Mart and local partners (joint control) The Joint Venture operations maintain more than 85% Nigerian workforceEngage local communities in the operations, providing employment and educational opportunitiesIncreasing Local Content by using local service companies, laboratory services, and personnel


According to Wade (2012), managing partner and local community relationships has proved to be a challenge for many oil field operators. Also, many oil companies have historically mismanaged relationships with the local communities, which have led to difficulties in oilfield operations. Mart's success has been a result of maintaining good working relationships with its partners and local communities. Wade (2012) posited that: "Midwestern Oil and Gas implements social projects and financially supports various social groups. These programs help to increase living standards for people as well provides opportunities for personal development".


The host community is recognized as important partners. The willing active support of the communities as partners is indispensable to the business. Emphasis was placed on enhancing relationship with the community. Oil and gas companies should consider social projects and involvement in the development of local community as an important part of its activity, readily participating in the activities of local community and developing good relationships with it. Oil and gas companies should invest in building sustainable programme in the community.


According to MPN SEPLAT (2012), Seplat leverages the successful onshore track record of platform (Asuokpu/Umutu marginal field-OML38) regarding community relationship management. Host communities were regarded as stakeholders and capacity building and empowerment a primary objective in the partnership. The host communities consist of four major stake holding communities and thirty-five others of smaller size. The company is committed to a programme of proactive engagement with the communities to implement sustainable development programmes. Community engagement forum is used to dialog with the communities and keep them abreast of the company's operation. There is the development of a 5-year general memorandum of understanding with the host communities. Also, there were formal courtesy visit to the traditional rulers within the SEPLAT's areas of operation.


Table 1 shows the corporate social responsibility of some marginal oil field operators which were awarded license in 2003 to develop the field. A marginal oil field is one that the profitability may be low due to some unfavorable conditions.


Table 1Corporate social responsibility initiative by marginal field development companies MidwesternAssisted flood victims during the flood disaster of 2012.Construction of 500m drains system within Umusadege communityConstruction of 1.5km interlock road in UmusadegeAwarded 42 scholarship to different categories of students worth 150,0te00 to students drawn from the community and across the stateProvided boreholes and modern toiletsProvision of 20 bed amenity ward at the kwale general hospital and fully equippedAlso as part of its Midwestern oil and gas in collaboration with Suntrust oil company Ltd. Built and donated blocks of 12 class to Utagba Ogbe- communities, Kwale, Delta state. Platform petroleum Provision of water scheme for Ogbe-uzu community completed in 2007 and in use. Running cost till date is on PPL/NP2.Street light project completed in 2007, in line with MOUBridge construction at Adoneshaka, across Ethiope, project completed in 2008 and now in useConstruction of welding shade for Adoneshaka communityConstruction of town hall project at Ogbe-Uza community, project completed in 2008 in line with MOUBuilt class room for host community.The company donated an Ultra-modern building to geology department of university of Nigeria (UNN) Universal energy resourcesExpand 50 M annually on CSR project and programme under with the existing Memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the communities.Scholarship worth N 3.1 m and micro credit scheme with N2 M were given to the communitites across universal energy resources limited/SIPEC operational areas.They are also involved in Human capacity development and the establishment facilities with the host communities Energia Petroleum/Oando Formal education and skill acquisition program for its host community.Empowering the youths of its host/Impacted communities thereby Sustained peace in Niger Delta regio Oriental EnergyFocus on capacity building initiatives such as training and improved education.Employment of 100 key Afren Commercial, Legal, Technical and operational staff Pillar oilObserves all health and safety regulations.Establish cordial relationship with relevant Federal and State government agencies remain cordial MidwesternAssisted flood victims during the flood disaster of 2012.Construction of 500m drains system within Umusadege communityConstruction of 1.5km interlock road in UmusadegeAwarded 42 scholarship to different categories of students worth 150,0te00 to students drawn from the community and across the stateProvided boreholes and modern toiletsProvision of 20 bed amenity ward at the kwale general hospital and fully equippedAlso as part of its Midwestern oil and gas in collaboration with Suntrust oil company Ltd. Built and donated blocks of 12 class to Utagba Ogbe- communities, Kwale, Delta state. Platform petroleum Provision of water scheme for Ogbe-uzu community completed in 2007 and in use. Running cost till date is on PPL/NP2.Street light project completed in 2007, in line with MOUBridge construction at Adoneshaka, across Ethiope, project completed in 2008 and now in useConstruction of welding shade for Adoneshaka communityConstruction of town hall project at Ogbe-Uza community, project completed in 2008 in line with MOUBuilt class room for host community.The company donated an Ultra-modern building to geology department of university of Nigeria (UNN) Universal energy resourcesExpand 50 M annually on CSR project and programme under with the existing Memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the communities.Scholarship worth N 3.1 m and micro credit scheme with N2 M were given to the communitites across universal energy resources limited/SIPEC operational areas.They are also involved in Human capacity development and the establishment facilities with the host communities Energia Petroleum/Oando Formal education and skill acquisition program for its host community.Empowering the youths of its host/Impacted communities thereby Sustained peace in Niger Delta regio Oriental EnergyFocus on capacity building initiatives such as training and improved education.Employment of 100 key Afren Commercial, Legal, Technical and operational staff Pillar oilObserves all health and safety regulations.Establish cordial relationship with relevant Federal and State government agencies remain cordial View Large


Adapted from: Success factors for marginal oil field development in Niger Delta region (2018)


In table 2 the CSR variable was coded as the dependent variable because of the broad questions about the nature of CSR policy in the various oil and gas activities. The elements which are listed in the column of independent variables were categorized as such because they reflect the various dimensions in which the study sought to determine the impact of CSR on. The volume of data was quite overwhelming and so for the purpose of the summary, only data which directly meet the requirements of the study objectives is presented.


Table 2 Independent Variables
            . Dependent Variables
            . Employment Corporate Social responsibility (CSR) Ecological environment Social infrastructure empowerment communication Community participation Health and safety Levilihood support Sustainability Independent Variables
            . Dependent Variables
            . Employment Corporate Social responsibility (CSR) Ecological environment Social infrastructure empowerment communication Community participation Health and safety Levilihood support Sustainability Source: authors computationsView Large


Niger Delta Exploration Company (NDEP) and the Host Community Relation. A Model of Sustainable Community Development


NDEP (with the other companies to which it is affiliated) has a general philosophy concerning the management of host community relations that is being adopted for and will guide the implementation of the Ogbelle project a marginal field. The essence of NDEP's host community relations philosophy can be summarized as follows:


An indigenous oil and gas group, NDEP uses its better understanding of the problems faced both by the operating companies and the host communities in approaching the development of the environment in which it operates as well as issue of compensation payments.


For each of its project, NDEP sets up a joint venture. A condition of each of these ventures is that 5% (five percent) of the net pre-tax profits of the joint venture is ploughed back into an endowment fund of a Community Development Trust established by NDEP for the benefit of the host communities in which the projects’ development facilities are situated.


In each case, the relative project joint venture will include NDEP, a public company in which the Host Communities will be invited to invest in the same way as everybody else. In this way, each Host Community, and each individual unit, can indirectly own equity in the project to the extent that it can afford.


The aims and objects of the aforementioned community and Environment Development Trust fund include:


Understanding and financing of host community projects for the advancement and sustainable development of host communitiesAdvancement and propagation of education and learning generally in the Host CommunitiesEnhancing and supporting local initiatives that deals with protection of the environment in the host CommunitiesFacilitating employment opportunities and capacity building in the Host CommunitiesDevelopment of projects of public utilities to the Host communitiesAdvancement of other purpose beneficial to the Host Communities in general


NDEP or its associates structured the Community and environmental Development trust to operate ultimately as a distinct corporate body whose operations, though supported by NDEP and its associated companies is not managed by it. It has representation from the Host communities on its advisory board and is overseen by professionals in various discipline as appropriate. There are separate funds for each set of Host communities relative to each project.


The community and Environmental Development Trust Endowment fund is invested to produce an income that is used to support Host Community development project. Trust consulted appropriate local stakeholders to identify such projects. Since the income from the Endowment Fund will continue to accrue even at the end of the project life, the trust may be able to take on continuing commitments.


The trust at various time work in concert with relevant government agencies, local and international NGOs and private bodies whose interest are similar and which target the same beneficiaries. Proper execution of the model has greatly ameliorated most problems presently experiences regarding community relations in the development of oil and gas operations and resulted in the establishment of cordial relationship among all stakeholders in each project.


For a couple of reasons, CSR is a prime issue in the development of oil/gas fields in Niger Delta where there is a very high sense of being marginalized and cheated out of the oil wealth the land produce and this situation has led to disharmony. In adequate corporate social responsibilities efforts and activities or inadequacy of it can result in many problems for the oil/ gas companies. These problem areas will include: Sabotage, Hostility, Arson, spreading of destructive rumours, fictitious petition writing company, Kidnapping, an outright attack on the one company's employee or installation, pilfering, stealing demonstration and destruction of oil/gas infrastructure. (Humphrey and Dosunmu 2017). The vulnerability of the infrastructure to sabotage is underscored by the poor property rights, enforcement regime and exclusion technology employed to protect it. The technology of excluding potential saboteurs and community collaborators from the complex oil and gas infrastructure in a sustainable manner is costly and implementing such technology may threaten the very profitability of investment in the infrastructure (Pedro and Joshua 2014). In Nigeria the people of Niger Delta region have staged several protests and demonstrations against the multinational oil companies operating in the region for violating air and land pollution and banning further exploration or drilling except where pollution standards are maintained.


Conclusions and Recommendations


Conclusions


The findings of the data collected and analysed proved the following:


That the community leaders, including chiefs, village heads, local authority officials and other administrators, believe that oil and gas companies must invest more in the host communities.Ordinary members of the oil and gas communities also believe that the CSI by oil and gas companies in infrastructure like roads, water, clinics, training, etc is inadequate.Both community members and their leaders believe that the host communities are entitled to a share of revenue from oil and gas activities in their area through CSI.Oil and gas companies, on the contrary, believe that they are investing significantly in the socio-economic development of their host communities through their CSR programmes.The levels of CSI differ from company to company as there is no set formula or amounts to be invested in CSR programmes.


The problem identified in the beginning was therefore confirmed by the study findings which necessitates recommendations to mitigate the problem.


Recommendations


In pursuit of a durable solution to the problem that was confirmed by the findings of the research, the following recommendations are proffered by the study:


That Government carries out a petroleum industry consultative process to come up with a CSR policy for all petroleum companies that stipulates a percentage of revenue that all oil and gas companies are required to invest in the host community annually. This is in line with the Petroleum industry act (PIA) which recommends 3 % of operationg expenditure (OPEX) to be used as CSR in the host communities.CSR must start at the top and be considered as a factor in strategic planning by oil and gas industry and create social or organizational structure that supports the social responsibility frame work and constantly communicate the result of the ongoing effort to all stake holders and publicly celebrate success. That all oil and gas companies produce an audited Corporate Social Investment report showing CSR projects undertaken, impacts and the cost which must meet the minimum percentage set in 1 above.There must be a community needs assessment and CSR projects prioritisation involving the oil companies, community leaders and community members annually.The researcher proposes that for Government policy to be effective and benchmarked to international best practice, the policy review must be based on relevant and applicable aspects of the following guidelines:The International Council on Sustainable Development Framework for the petroleum industry which was crafted to enhance transparency on CSR in host communities.The Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI)OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (1976)Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) (2000) – Sustainable Reporting GuidelinesUnited Nations Global Compact (2000)Equator Principles (2003)ISO26000 Guidelines on Social Responsibility (2010)


This paper was selected for presentation by an SPE program committee following review of information contained in an abstract submitted by the author(s). Contents of the paper have not been reviewed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and are subject to correction by the author(s). The material does not necessarily reflect any position of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, its officers, or members. Electronic reproduction, distribution, or storage of any part of this paper without the written consent of the Society of Petroleum Engineers is prohibited. Permission to reproduce in print is restricted to an abstract of not more than 300 words; illustrations may not be copied. The abstract must contain conspicuous acknowledgment of SPE copyright.


References


AdeolaAdekinju (2002): A paper delivered at the conference on sustainable development: resources ownership in Nigerian by the institution of public policy analysis on September 18, 2002. Federal palace hotel, Victoria Island, Lagos.Google Scholar Baridam, D.M. (2001). Research Methods in Administrative Sciences. Diobu, Port Harcourt: BELK PublishersGoogle Scholar Baker, J. (2001) OECD conference on corporate social responsibility. "Freedom of association and CSR": available at:http://www.oecd.org/pdf/M00003000/M00003662.pdf [Accessed 15 Oct 2018].Google Scholar Chikwe, J.E. (2012). Corporate social responsibility and organizational effectiveness of oil companies in Nigeria. An unpublished Ph. D Thesis, Department of Management, Rivers State University of Science and Technology,Port Harcourt, NigeriaGoogle Scholar Dijken, F. V. (2007). Corporate Social Responsibility: Market regulation and the evidence. Managerial Law (Emerald)49(4), 141– 184Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Emma IfeanyiOgueri, IkeNwachukwu b, RayUnamma (2010): Critical success factors affecting sustainability of oil and gas production in Niger Delta, Nigeria. Available athttp://www.ssrn.com/link/OIDA-Intl-Journal-Sustainable-Dev.html accessed on 24th December 2012Google Scholar Ite, U. E (2004): Multinational and corporate social responsibility in developing countries. A case study of Nigeria, corporate social responsibility and environmental management, Vol II no.1 Pp 1–11March2004Google Scholar MPN SEPLAT (2012): MP Nigeria management presentation October 2012.Niger Delta Exploration and Production (NDEP): The Ogbelle Fields Development Project and other Upstream Petroleum Industry Project. ProspectusJuly2001:Olirtzky, M., Seigel, D.S., Waldman, D.A. (2011) "Strategic Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Sustainability", Business and Society, Vol.50 No.6: Sage Publications.Google Scholar Oruwari, Humphrey O: AdewaleDosunmu (2017): Constraints in sustainable development of marginal oil field in Niger Delta: SPE paper no 189060: Nigeria Annual International conference and exhibition heldLagos, Nigeria, 31 July- 2 August 2017.Google Scholar Frynas, J.G. (2005). The false development promise of Corporate Social Responsibility: evidence from multinational oil companies. International Affairs, 81(3), 581–598Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Havard Business School (HBS) (2003b) Harvard Business Review on Corporate Responsibility, The New Corporate Philanthropy, Harvard Business School Press.Ibibia, L. W (2002): Environmental Law and policy of Petroleum Development. Strategies and Mechanisms for Sustainable Management in Africa. Pp 5-6and Pp 296. Published by Anpez Center for Environment and Development Port Harcourt.Google Scholar PedroEgbe and JoshuaGogo (2014): Comprehensive response to the threat of environmental degradation and oil and gas infrastructure integrity violation in Nigeria: Nigeria oil field technology review- June 2014, vol. 2 issue 2Google Scholar Porter, M. (2003:23) Harvard Business Review on Corporate Responsibility, The Competitive Advantage of Corporate Philanthropy, Harvard Business School Press.Google Scholar Rushton, K. (2002) "Business Ethics: A Sustainable Approach", Business Ethics: A European Review, April, Vol.11, No. 2, pp.137–139Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Wade, C: (2012): Mart resouces Inc: A Nigerian marginal field case study. A corporate presentation by Mart resources Inc, 9th October, 2012 at the North American Assembly, the Four Season Hotel. Houston Texas: available at www.martresources.com accessed on 15th December 2012.Google Scholar Welford, R. (2002) "Globalisation, Corporate Social Responsibility and Human Rights", Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management, Vol.9, No.1, pp.1–8.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  




Copyright 2022, Society of Petroleum Engineers DOI 10.2118/211934-MS



