----- METADATA START -----
Title: Impact of Sustainable Finance on Implementation of Environmental Sustainability Goals in Nigeria's Oil and Gas Sector
Authors: Olasunkanmi Olusogo Olagunju, OlawaleOlusola Ajasa, Fuad Kayode Laguda
Publication Date: August 2022
Reference Link: https://doi.org/10.2118/211966-MS
----- METADATA END -----



Abstract


This study unveiled that mitigation of chronic environmental quagmires caused by oil exploration and production in Nigeria requires investment by oil and gas companies in sustainable finance.More specifically, this study showed that investment in green bonds, climate insurance and venture capital among others can help prevent ecological hazards that emanate from exploration and production activities in Nigeria's oil fields.Having built on inductive approach and institutional theory this study unveiled that sustainable finance has roles to play in implementation of environmental sustainability goals of Nigeria's oil and gas sector. The study consequently concluded that stakeholders and industry leaders must be committed to investment in sustainable finance to achieve targeted social and environmental outcomes.It equally suggested that industry's key players should embrace investment in green funds while implementing their environmental sustainability goals.




Keywords:
nigeria,
investment,
environmental sustainability goal,
capital,
sustainability,
sustainable development,
sustainable finance,
instrument,
upstream oil & gas,
banking & finance


Subjects: 
Sustainability/Social Responsibility,
Sustainable development




INTRODUCTION


The exploration and production activities of oil and gas companiesmostlycome with some environmental quagmires which pose untold hardship to both human and aquatic livelihoods (Hauwa, 2021). The rising environmental hazards in most of Nigeria's oil fieldshave further aggravated the negative externalities contributing to greenhouse gases and environmental pollution in Nigeria(Abdel-Ati, 2020). As rightly observed by Hauwa (2020), oil spillages, depleting farm lands, and water pollution have wrecked severe economic and financial havocs on the human livelihoodsthereby fueling communal uprisings among villages and towns where extractive or exploration activities are taking place.


The recent sooth disease and deadly oil spillageat coastal areas in Nigeria are products of industrial pressures on the ecosystem rising from production and exploration activities of major oil and gas firms (IFC, 2021; UNEP Finance Initiative, 2017). Against this backdrop, Sholem (2021) viewed that industryleaders and national policymakers can collaborate with global institutions to adopt viable sustainability goals which will be implemented with sustainable finance ofsafety programmes to reduce environmental hazards.


These environmental sustainability goals require policy frameworks to deploy resilient financial instruments to curtail the occurrence of untolddegradationin Nigeria's oil producing regions (Kiron, et al. 2017). Karim (2021) concisely suggested that adoption of sustainable finance by operating exploration and production firms can create value-chain for green assets needed to actualizetheir long-term objectives which include innovative and environmentally-sustainable performance of operators in Nigeria's oil and gas sector.


Knudsen et al. (2015) and Kim (2020) tracedthe spiraling poverty, food crisis and famine in Nigeria to exploration and production activities of major oil gas companies. Crifo & Mottis (2016) and Eze (2020) argued that most of ecological quagmires at the Niger-Delta are initially caused by government policy failure and weak implementation process. Contrarily, Sholem (2021) argued thatclimatic hazards, diseases and food shortages have nefarious implications onstrategic alleviation of poverty and economic hardships in Nigeria.


This study seeks to bridge the knowledge gaps by adopting aexploratory approach to unearth the influence of sustainable finance on mitigating climate change, environmental pollution, and global greenhouse gases in not only the oil producing states but also in the entire nation. The study adopted a secondary approach to unveil how green finance, venture capital, climate insurance and green bonds can facilitate inclusive approach to enacting policies or deploying financial instruments to preventuntold effects of environmental hazards on implementation of environmental sustainability goals in Nigeria's oil and gas sector. This study seeks to examine the contribution of sustainable finance to execution of environmental sustainability goals in Nigeria's oil and gas sector.


CONCEPTUAL DEFINITIONS


Sustainable Finance: Steffen etal. (2015) defined this concept as the process of putting much emphasis on environmental and social governance. This also implies the act of enacting policy decisions to foster greeninvestment to achieve sustainable economic activities and climate-mitigating projects (Generation Foundation, 2015). According to Sholem (2021), sustainable finance is specifically focused on environmental considerations and adoption of mitigation and adaptation approaches to prevention of ecological hazards.


Environmental Sustainability: This concept encapsulates all strategic activities relating to preservation of biodiversity, pollution prevention as well as circular economy (IFC, 2021; UNEP, 2018). Kim (2020) and Hauwa (2021) conceptualised environmental sustainability as vital for deploying sustainable finance for ecological protection. In other words, Lin and Ankrah (2019) defined environmental sustainability as a functional procedure for devising mechanisms and policy frameworks for actualising social and environmental outcomes of any corporations or firms.


OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY


The main objective of this study is to investigate the influence of sustainable finance on implementation of environmental sustainability goals in Nigeria's oil and gas sector.


The specific objectives of this study are, namely:


To examine the impact of sustainable finance mitigation of environmental havocs emanating from exploration and production activities in Nigeria's oil and gas sector.To diagnose how sustainable finance can promote actualization of policies to foster social and environmental objectives of Nigeria's oil and gas sector.To scrutinize how mobilization of green funds and ecological finance can help reduce the negative externalities associated with exploration and production of oil and gas in Nigeria.To reveal whether sustainable finance requires public-private partnership to prevent economic consequences of ecological hazards.


RESEARCH HYPOTHESIS


H1: Deployment of sustainable financecontributes to actualization of social and environmental objectives of Nigeria's oil and gas sector.


H1: Sustainable finance contributes to implementation of environmental sustainability goals in Nigeria's oil and gas sector.


H2: Sustainable finance has impact on mitigation ofenvironmental havocs emanating fromexploration and production activities of Nigeria's oil and gas sector.


H4: Mobilization of green funds and ecological finance can help reduce the negative externalities associated with exploration and production of oil and gas in Nigeria.


H5: Sustainable finance requires public-private partnership to prevent economic consequences of ecological hazards.


JUSTIFICATION FOR THE STUDY


The justification for this study is look into the impacts of sustainable finance on mitigating environmental challenges associated with exploration and production activities of oil gas firms in Nigeria. The work justifiably examines the relevant financial policies and instruments and their influence on economic, innovative, and financial performance of firms. The work is also justified by adopting an exploratory and qualitative approach to unveiling the institutional relevance of climate bonds, climate risk financing and green funds on implementation of environmental sustainability goals in Nigeria's oil and gas firms. The study is also inclined to justify that oil and gas companies in Nigeria have significant roles in advancing sustainable cities, resilient climate security and innovative development goals in Nigeria.


LITERATURE REVIEW


As one of the core goals of the United Nations to be fully implemented by 2030, environmental sustainability occupies dominant role in UN's global agenda for ameliorating global economic and ecological shocks (Lin and Ankrah, 2019; UNEP, 2018; UN, 2015). Companies like Total Energies, Chevron and ExxonMobil have shown greater seriousness to deploying green assets and ecological finance to ameliorate the human and environmental disasters of oil exploration and production especially in the Niger-Delta in Nigeria.


Irigoyen(2017) examined the role of sustainable finance in implementation of environmental sustainability goals cannot be overemphasized. Abdel-Ati (2020) portends that sustainability and operational performance of oil and gas sector in Nigeria must be matched to forestall the acute depletion of the ecosystem. The Paris Climate Accord (2016) offered a remarkable landmark for promoting the sustainability of ecosystem through active involvement of stakeholders and institutions.


Kiron et al. (2017) argued using OLS model that most some financial and banking institutions are adopting viable financial instruments—venture capital, bonds, or insurance—to mitigate the effects of climate change and environmental depletion on their profitability. The United Nations Environment Programme (2017) had earlier called for strategic alliance among concerned institutions and industry leaders to mobilize adequate financial resources to address the negative effects of oil spillages, soil depletion and rising food shortages caused by exploration and production works in the oil fields especially in the Niger-Delta.


However, strategic implementation of policies which can foster social and environment outcomes require considerable investments from the green funds, climate bonds and sustainable capitals. Thus, Kim (2020) focused on endogenous growth model to explain that sustainable finance can lend support to Nigeria's oil and gas firms to take active role in mitigating ecological risks—coupled with the resultant macroeconomic shocks—arising from environmental quagmires.


As investigated by Karim (2020), the Green Finance Platform has helped industry managers and national policymakers to mobilise efforts tolend support foradoption of green finance (UN, 2015). More specifically, Tirole (2017) revealed that Nigeria's oil and gas sector must devise policies to contribute to social and environmental security by mobilizing fiduciary assets and/or green finance to help reduce ecologically-hazardous or climate-related risks.


Using econometric technique, Abdel-Ati(2020) showed that global investment in sustainable finance was about $608 billion in 2017 and $540 billion in 2018 owing to support from China, the United States and India respectively (Kim, 2020). Lin and Ankrah (2019) revealed that climate finance was exemplified by corporate commitment to renewable energy, capacity management as well as programme dedicated toenvironmental management.


RESEARCH METHODOLOGY


The researcher gathered the data using content analysis and institutional archives to analyse the impact of sustainable finance on implementation of environment sustainability goals of Nigeria's oil and gas sector. It also adopts expert review to qualitatively evaluate how green finance, venture capital and green bonds can help achieve actualize the environmental sustainability of Nigeria's oil and gas sector. Relevant anti-plagiarism test was conducted to proof the validity and reliability of the data used in this methodology (Asika, 2014). The validity of every data used is tested to ascertain their reliability (Bäckström & Fischer, 2018). The study also collected data via review of relevant literature such as standard textbooks, articles, journals, internet, and other institutional publications.


THEORETICAL UNDERPINNINGS


Thistheory represents one of most resilient aspects of any social structure which considers the processes by which structures which include rules, schemes, norms and routines become established as authoritative guidelines for social behaviour (Scott, 2004). However, diverse components of institutional theory describe how these elements are created, diffused, adopted and adapted over space and time as well as how they fall into decline and disuse.


There exists no single and universally agreed definition of an institution in the school of thought. However, institutions comprise some social structures and policy ecosystem which have attained a high degree of flexibility (Scott, 2008). Institutions equallyencapsulate normative and regulative elements associated with policies, programmes and resources. Kiron et al. (2017) justified that institutions exist to give stability and definite meaning to both public and organizational policies.


This theory investigated that functional institutions are vital to mobilization and allocation of green finance and climate bonds to implement programmes to prevent or ameliorate the environmental quagmires emanating from oil exploration and production (Crifo & Mottis, 2016). These institutions are construed as the main actors in deploying sustainable finance to solve environmental challenges to achieve the proposed targets of operating firms in the industry without necessarily compromising the sustainability of aquatic, forests and urban ecosystem.


The norms, values and corporate social policies of and government and oil and gas companies largely influence the implementation of environmental sustainability objectives to drive the deployment of sustainable finance to address climate shocks and ecological problems bedeviling many of oil producing states in Nigeria. Both public and private institutions must play active roles in enforcing compliance mechanisms and mobilizing adequate investment in green bonds, climate insurance, and other relevant financial instruments.


FINDINGS OF THE STUDY


The mobilization and allocation of capital for green investments or green economy might have some inherent challenges but the benefits of sustainable finance to climate stability were viewed by Tirole(2017) as instrumental to long-term green investments among diverse operators in Nigeria's oil and gas sector. Hauwa (2021) consequently illustrated that sustainable finance has positive impacts on stimulating realistic environmental policiesto ensure capital flows to develop capacity-building initiatives with high social and environmental impacts.


This study uncovered that Total Energies and Shell have incorporated implementation of environmental sustainability goals into their corporate social responsibilities. This study revealed that Oando PLC and Chevron are prominent oil and gas firms with substantial budget for actualization their environmental and social objectives (IFC, 2021; Irigoyen, 2017). According to Steffen et al. (2015), sustainable finance has gained currency among major industry players who wish to ameliorate the ecological quagmires emanating from oil exploration and production in Nigeria's oil fields.


This study also revealed that finance for climate and environmental protection need to be increased and allocated in a transparent and accountable manner. The study concisely unveiled that sustainable financial instruments to be utilized by Nigeria's oil and gas companies must be channeled towards active transitioning of operating firms to climate-resilient and low-carbon exploration and production activities.


DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS


It is noted that investment in green finance and climate bonds are necessary for mitigating the spread of diseases in the major oil producing states in Nigeria. More specifically, this study expounded that oil and gas companies in Nigeria must step up their commitment to harnessing the negative effects of exploration and production activities to prevent environmental challenges. As rightly observed by Ndubuisi-Okolo et al. (2020), this analysis indicated that achievement of economic, social and environmental targets of Nigeria's oil and gas sector requires active collaboration among government and corporate leaders.


Based on the foregoing, the analysis revealed that oil and gas firms must step up their financial contributions to implementation of programmes to prevent acute famine, aquatic contamination, oil spillages and unregulated disposal of industrial wastes in especially in the Niger-Delta of Nigeria. In support of Elum and Momodu (2020), this analysis uncovered that Addax Petroleum and Seplat Petroleum are improving of mobilization of green finance to mitigate the negative externalities associated with exploration and production of oil resources.


The study made serious intellectual attempts to show that Sahara Group and ExxonMobil have become deeply involved in sustainability projects to promote safer planet in Nigeria. In support of Hauwa (2021), this illustrated that sustainable finance is a potent mechanism for promoting healthier and suitable ecology for economic and human survival. In other words, active investment in climate insurance, ecological funds and green bonds can help actualise global and domestic environmental goals.


CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION


This study concluded that sustainable finance is a necessary mechanism for successful implementation of environmental sustainability goals of Nigeria's oil and gas companies. The study also concluded that sustainability targets of Nigeria's oil and gas firms can be achieved by mobilizing and deploying sustainable finance. The study suggested thatindustry actors and institutionsmust adopt policy frameworks to programmatically deploysustainablefinance to mitigate the negative environmental shocks caused by economic activities in Nigeria's oil and gas sector. The study also recommends the adoption of sustainable finance among oil and gasfirms in Nigeria to create pathways toimplementation of environmental sustainability goals in Nigeria's oil and gas sector.


This paper was selected for presentation by an SPE program committee following review of information contained in an abstract submitted by the author(s). Contents of the paper have not been reviewed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and are subject to correction by the author(s). The material does not necessarily reflect any position of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, its officers, or members. Electronic reproduction, distribution, or storage of any part of this paper without the written consent of the Society of Petroleum Engineers is prohibited. Permission to reproduce in print is restricted to an abstract of not more than 300 words; illustrations may not be copied. The abstract must contain conspicuous acknowledgment of SPE copyright.


References


Abdel-Ati, I. (2020). The EU emissions trading system seeking to improve.Climate Scorecard. In https://www.climatescorecard.org/2020/03/the-evolving-eu-emissions-trading-system/#:~:text=The%20EU%20ETS%20has%20been,failing%20to%20meet%20its%20goalsGoogle Scholar Asika, N. (2014). Research methodology in the behavioural sciences. 2nd Edition. Longman Nigerian Plc.Google Scholar Bäckström, T. and Fischer, J. (2018). Fast randomization for distributed low-bitrate coding of speech and audio. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing. 26(1), 19–30.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Elum, Z. A. & Momodu, A. S. (2017). Climate change mitigation and renewable energy for sustainable development in Nigeria: A discourse approach. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 76, 72–80.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Cooper, S.(2019).The evolution of sustainable finance. Standard Chartered. In https://www.sc.com/en/feature/the-evolution-of-sustainable-finance.Google Scholar Crifo, P. &Mottis, N. (2016). Socially responsible investment in France. Business & Society, 55 (4), 576 – 593.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  International Finance Corporation. (2021). Sustainability In The Nigerian Financial Sector. In https://esrmafrica.org/nigeria-posts-4/IrigoyenC. (2017). The carbon tax in Australia. Centre for Public Impact. https://www.centreforpublicimpact.org/case-study/carbon-tax-australia/Google Scholar KarimH. (2021). Green lemons: Overcoming adverse selection in the green bond market. Transnational Corporations, 28 (3), 35–63.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Kim, E.J. (2020). East Asia's first mandatory emissions trading system.Climate Scorecard. In https://www.climatescorecard.org/2020/03/east-asias-first-mandatory-emissions-trading-system/Google Scholar Kiron, D., Unruh, G., Kruschwitz, N., Reeves, M., Rubel, H., & Meyer ZumFelde, A. (2017). Corporate sustainability at a crossroads. MIT Sloan Management Review, 1–27.Google Scholar Eze. J. (2020). Strange disease which killed many in Delta community is yellow fever – Official. Retrieved from www.premiumtimesng.com/news/top-news/424924-strange-disease-which-killed-many-in-delta-community-is-yellow-fever-official.html.Google Scholar GenerationFoundation. (2015). Allocating Capital for Long-Term Returns: The Strengthened Case for Sustainable Capitalism.Inhttps://www.genfound.org/media/1373/pdf-genfound-wp2015-final.pdf.Google Scholar Hauwa, A. A. (2021). SEC Adopts Sustainable Finance Principles For Capital Market. Voice of Nigeria.Retrived fromhttps://von.gov.ng/2021/05/24/sec-adopts-sustainable-finance-principles-for-capital-market.Google Scholar Knudsen, J. S., Moon, J. and Slager, R. (2015). Government policies for corporate social responsibility in Europe: A comparative analysis of institutionalisation. Policy & Politics, 43(1), 81 – 88.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Lin, I. & Ankrah, I. (2019). On Nigeria's renewable energy program: Examining the effectiveness, substitution potential, and the impact on national output.Energy, 167, 1181–1193.Google Scholar Ndubuisi-Okolo, P., Rita, I & Ekwochi, A. E. (2020). environmental sustainability and sustainable development in Nigeria: problems and prospects.Retrieved fromhttps://www.researchgate.net/publication/339596942_Environmental_Sustainability_and_Sustainable_Development_in_Nigeria_Problems_and_Prospects.Google Scholar Scott, W. R. (2004). Institutional theory.In Encyclopaedia of Social Theory, GeorgeRitzer, ed. Thousand Oaks CA: Sage Publications.Google Scholar Scott, W. R. (2008). Institutions and organisations: Ideas and Interests. Los Angeles, CA: Sage publications.Google Scholar Sholem, M. (2021). ESMA proposes rules for taxonomy-alignment of non-financial undertakings and asset managers. The National Law Review.Google Scholar Steffen,W.et al. . (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. Science347(6223), 736–47.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  Tirole, J.(2017). Economics for the common good.PrincetonUniversity Press,Princeton.Google Scholar United Nations Environment Programme.(2018).Single-Use Plastics: A Roadmap for Sustainability. In http://wedocs.unep.orgUNEP Finance Initiative. (2017). The evolutionofsustainable finance. In https://www.unepfi.org/news/25th-anniversary/timeline/United Nations. (2015). UN sustainable development goals: Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable development. A/RES/70/1,NewYork.




Copyright 2022, Society of Petroleum Engineers DOI 10.2118/211966-MS



