----- METADATA START -----
Title: Investigation on Effect of Enzyme on Oil-Brine Emulsification
Authors: Tinuola Udoh, Osadebamen Aigbodion
Publication Date: August 2022
Reference Link: https://doi.org/10.2118/211906-MS
----- METADATA END -----



Abstract


In this paper, the capacity of enzyme to influence brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions was investigated. The emulsion stability index method was used to monitor the effect of varied enzyme concentrations (1-, 5- and 10 wt.%) on oil-brine emulsion stability and separation process. The result of the study shows that the addition of different concentrations of enzyme to oil-brine mixtures enhanced the mixing and separation of the emulsions at varied capacities. Faster oil-brine separation was observed with increase in enzyme concentrations, but better mixing and higher emulsion stability was observed with lower concentration of enzyme. The result of this study is of a great significance to enzyme enhanced oil recovery application process in which good oil-brine mixture is require for the recovery of the residual oil saturation from the reservoir rock pores and the separation of oil and brine that is required after production at the surface.




Keywords:
rock/fluid interaction,
oilfield chemistry,
enzyme concentration,
chemical treatment,
concentration,
application,
upstream oil & gas,
production chemistry,
emulsion,
oil-in-brine emulsion


Subjects: 
Production Chemistry, Metallurgy and Biology,
Improved and Enhanced Recovery,
Downhole chemical treatments and fluid compatibility




Introduction


Emulsification is stable dispersion of one liquid in another liquid. Two immiscible liquids cannot form stable emulsion without the presence of an interfacial compound as emulsifying agent that can stabilise the suspension of one liquid in another. Hence, an emulsion system is defined by three regions namely disperse phase, continuous phase and interfacial layer consisting of emulsifier such as amphiphatic molecules [1]. Interfacial compounds such as surfactants, enzyme etc., are amphiphilic in nature due to the presence of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic groups in their molecules. This enables them to partition preferentially at interface of two immiscible liquids such as oil and water and stabilises one in the other. Depending on the degree of their partition and the quantity of fluids present, either oil-in-water or water-in-oil emulsion will result [2]. The oil-in-water emulsion has water as the continuous phase and oil as the dispersed phase, while the water-in-oil emulsion has the oil as the continuous phase and water as the dispersed phase. The stability of an emulsion is relative to its usage which may varies from few minutes to years [3].


Oil-in-water and water-in-oil emulsions are commonly encountered in oil production systems depending on the phase of the production operation. During primary oil recovery process, there is tendency for water-in-oil emulsion to be prevalent when more oil and little water is being produced. However, continuous implementation water flooding during secondary recovery process will result in formation of dispersed oil in continuous water phase. The tertiary enhanced oil recovery application of interfacial compounds is effective at reducing oil-brine interfacial tension thereby promoting their mixing and formation of oil-in-water emulsion and mobilisation of residual oil saturation. Emulsification has been identified as one of the mechanisms by which surface active compound such as enzyme mobilises residual oil saturation during EOR process [4, 5]. Hence, the understanding of emulsification and emulsion stability is essential for elucidating the mechanisms involved in EOR and also attaining optimum phase separation in production operations.


In the recent past, there has been increased applications of enzymes in the oil and gas industry because the modern biotechnology industries are producing robust enzymes that are capable of tolerating oil reservoir environments [6, 7]. Different researchers have used enzymes to improve oil production and enhanced oil recovery [8, 9]. Other studies have also recorded better oil recovery with secondary and tertiary application of enzyme at different temperature and salinities [4, 10, 11]. Furthermore, the study by Moradi et al. [12] investigated the effect of salinity on water-in-crude oil emulsion and their results showed that emulsions are more stable at lower ionic strength of the aqueous phase than high ionic strength. Other study [4] has investigated the effect of salinity variation on enzyme oil-brine emulsification and their results showed that at equilibrium condition, similar effect occurs irrespective of the brine salinity. The objective of this study is to investigate the effect of varied enzyme concentrations and temperature on oil-in-brine and brine-in-oil emulsification process.


Material and method


Materials and sample preparation


The brine used in this study is a synthetic formation brine with salinity and compositional breakdown presented in Table 1. The brine was prepared with reagent salts of sodium chloride (NaCl), magnesium hexahydrate (MgCl2.6H2O), calcium chloride (CaCl2) and sodium sulfate (Na2SO4) dissolved in distilled water. The crude oil used in this study is light desalted crude oil from Warri Refining and Petrochemical Company. The emulsifying agent used for the emulsification process is a commercial enzyme engineered through a proprietary process that involves impregnating a high-protein nutrient solution with the DNA of selective oil-digesting microbes.


Table 1The brine compositional breakdown. Components
            . Quantity (g/L)
            . NaCl 56.16 CaCl2 4.20 MgCl2.6H2O 0.20 Na2SO4 0.02 Components
            . Quantity (g/L)
            . NaCl 56.16 CaCl2 4.20 MgCl2.6H2O 0.20 Na2SO4 0.02 View Large


Experimental method


The emulsions of different ratios of oil and brine were formed with their mixtures at varied degrees of volume ratios of 1:9, 2:8, 3:7, 4:6, 5:5; 6:4, 7:3, 8:2 and 9:1 ml of brine to oil, respectively. Enzyme of different concentrations (1, 5 and 10 wt.%) were used as the emulsifying agent. The mixtures were prepared in test tubes and vortexed for a minimum of 2 min and then allowed to equilibrate for a period of 24 hours. The stabilities of brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions formed were investigated using the emulsification index (E24) method described by Prieto et al. [13]. The emulsion stability was calculated based on the ratio of the height of emulsified layer (HE) to the height of the fluid (HF) using:


E24=HEHTx 100.(1)


The stability of the emulsions was monitored at different time intervals for a period of twenty-four hours. The effect of temperature on the emulsion stability was monitored using fixed volume of oil and brine ratio of 5 ml mixture by repeating the experiments at different temperatures (25, 50, 75 and 100 °C). Also, the effect of temperature on the density and viscosity of the brine and crude oil was measured at these temperatures using pycnometer and U-tube viscometer methods, respectively.


Results and discussion


Figure 1 shows the results of the effect of temperature variation on the densities of brine and crude oil used in this study. Generally, decrease in density with increase in system temperatures was observed for both brine and crude oil. The increase in temperature from 25 °C to 100 °C resulted in decrease of brine density from 1.11 g/cm3 to 1.02 g/cm3 and oil density from 0.91 g/cm3 to 0.86 g/cm3. The observed decrease in densities of brine and oil with increase in temperatures reflect their molecular expansion when their temperature increases and hence, the temperature dependence of density. This observed decrease in densities of brine and oil is consistent with the previous study by Karnanda et al. [14] Furthermore, the results of this test show that brine remained denser than oil irrespective of the experimental temperature and the lowest brine density is higher than the highest oil density.


Figure 1View largeDownload slideThe effect of varied temperature on densities of brine and oil.Figure 1View largeDownload slideThe effect of varied temperature on densities of brine and oil. Close modal


The results of the effect of varied temperatures on the viscosities of brine and oil are shown in Figure 2. For both brine and oil, increase in temperature caused the viscosities of brine and oil to reduce and increased their tendency to flow. The increase in temperature from 25 °C to 100 °C reduced the viscosities of brine from 0.89 cp to 0.28 cp and that of oil from 15,15 cp to 2.80 cp. This shows that increase in the system temperatures makes the fluids to be lighter and it may possibly influence their emulsification process.


Figure 2View largeDownload slideThe effect of varied temperature on viscosities of brine and oil.Figure 2View largeDownload slideThe effect of varied temperature on viscosities of brine and oil. Close modal


The addition of different concentrations of enzyme to the brine did not show any physical changes or precipitation. This means all the concentrations of enzyme used are soluble and compatible with the brine used in this study. Figures 3, 4 and 5 show the results of the effect of varied enzyme concentrations on brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsification process. Generally, addition of enzyme to the brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions facilitated their mixing during agitation and their settling during equilibration. This is due to its hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties that enables it to partition at the brine-oil interface. The degree of the effect of enzyme on the emulsions however varied based on its concentration. Figure 3 shows the result of the emulsification process as the brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions equilibrate with application of 1% enzyme concentration. It took about 15 hours for the emulsions to stabilise and extension of equilibration period to 24 hours did not modify the observed stabilities of the emulsions thereafter.


Figure 3View largeDownload slideThe effect of 1% enzyme concentration on brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions.Figure 3View largeDownload slideThe effect of 1% enzyme concentration on brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions. Close modal


Figure 4View largeDownload slideThe effect of 5% enzyme concentration on brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions.Figure 4View largeDownload slideThe effect of 5% enzyme concentration on brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions. Close modal


Figure 5View largeDownload slideThe effect of 10% enzyme concentration on brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions.Figure 5View largeDownload slideThe effect of 10% enzyme concentration on brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions. Close modal


The results of enzyme emulsification process of brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions with the application of 5% enzyme concentration are shown in Figure 4. The emulsions stabilised about 5 hours 50 minutes into the equilibration period, and this did not change with the extension of the equilibration period to 24 hours. This shows that faster emulsion stability was achieved with the use of 5% concentration relative to the application of 1% concentration. Finally, Figure 5 shows the results of the effect of 10% enzyme concentration on the emulsification process of brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions. It took about 3 hours 45 minutes for the emulsions to stabilise using this high concentration and the extension of the equilibration period to 24 hours did not modify the stabilities of the emulsions. This shows that the application of 10% enzyme concentration generated the fastest emulsion stability relative to the applications of 5% and 1% concentrations. When comparison between the results of the application of the enzyme as emulsification agents at different concentrations was made, it is obvious that its application can emulsify brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions irrespective of the concentration use. The rate at which the emulsions stabilised however varied based on the concentration of enzyme. The fastest emulsion stability rate was achieved with highest concentration, while the lowest concentration resulted in slowest stability rate. This shows that the concentration of enzyme required for the stability of brine-in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions is relative to the desired rate of stability.


Temperature plays an important role in the emulsion formulation and separation of the fluids due to its effects on the density and viscosity of the fluids. The results of the effect of change in enzyme concentrations on the brine-oil emulsions (5:5 ratio) at varied temperatures are shown in Figure 6. At low temperature (25 °C), a significant effect of varied enzyme concentrations on the brine-oil emulsion was observed, but as the temperature increases, the concentration effect became insignificant. This shows that increase in the system temperature increases the stability of the emulsion irrespective of the concentration of the enzyme. This signifies the importance of investigating the emulsification process at relevant temperatures and presents a bases for consideration of concentration choices for enzyme emulsification process.


Figure 6View largeDownload slideThe effect of varied temperature on enzyme stabilization of brine-oil (5:5) emulsion.Figure 6View largeDownload slideThe effect of varied temperature on enzyme stabilization of brine-oil (5:5) emulsion. Close modal


Conclusion


In this study, experimental investigation on effect of varied enzyme concentrations and temperatures on brine–in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions was conducted. The results show that the application of enzyme can emulsify and stabilise brine–in-oil and oil-in-brine emulsions at different concentrations. The enzyme stability of the emulsions is however temperature dependent at low temperature but otherwise at high temperatures. It is therefore recommended that enzyme emulsification tests should be conducted at temperature relevant to its application.


This paper was selected for presentation by an SPE program committee following review of information contained in an abstract submitted by the author(s). Contents of the paper have not been reviewed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and are subject to correction by the author(s). The material does not necessarily reflect any position of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, its officers, or members. Electronic reproduction, distribution, or storage of any part of this paper without the written consent of the Society of Petroleum Engineers is prohibited. Permission to reproduce in print is restricted to an abstract of not more than 300 words; illustrations may not be copied. The abstract must contain conspicuous acknowledgment of SPE copyright.


References


A. M.Herrero, P.Carmona, T.Pintado, F.Jiménez-Colmenero and C.Ruíz-Capillas, "Infrared spectroscopic analysis of structural features and interactions in olive oil-in-water emulsions stabilized with soy protein," Food Research International, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 360–366, 2011.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  S.Eskandari, H.Rashedi, Y.Ziaie-Shirkolaee, M.Mazaheri-Assadi, E.Jamshidi and B.Bonakdarpour, "Evaluation of oil recovery by rhamnolipid produced with isolated strain from Iranian oil wells," Ann. Microbial, vol. 59, p. 573–577, 2009.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  M.Rosen, "Adsorption of surface-active agents at interfaces: the electrical double layer," Surfactants Interfacial Phenomena, vol. 3, p. 34–104, 2004.Google Scholar T.Udoh, L.Akanji and J.Vinogradov, "Experimental Investigation of Potential of Combined Controlled Salinity and Bio-Surfactant CSBS in Enhanced Oil Recovery EOR Processes," in Paper SPE 193388 in SPE Nigeria Annual International Conference and Exhibition. Society of Petroleum Engineers. 10.2118/193388-MS, Lagos, Nigeria, 2018.Google Scholar T.Udoh and J.Vinogradov, "Effects of Temperature on Crude-Oil-Rock-Brine Interactions During Controlled Salinity Biosurfactant Flooding," in Paper SPE 198761 presented in SPE Nigeria Annual International Conference and Exhibition, Lagos, Nigeria, 2019.Google Scholar Y. K. A.Wang, B.Li, Z.Li, Q.Wang and M.Zhao, "New agent for formation-damage mitigation in heavy-oil reservoir: Mechanism and application," in In SPE International Symposium and Exhibition on Formation Damage Control, 2008.Google Scholar T. H.Udoh, "Experimental Investigation of Temperature Effects on Low Salinity Enzyme Enhanced Oil Recovery Process," Nigeria Journal of Technological Development, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 156–164, 2020.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  T.Udoh and J.Vinogradov, "A Synergy between Controlled Salinity Brine and Biosurfactant Flooding for Improved Oil Recovery: An Experimental Investigation Based on Zeta Potential and Interfacial Tension Measurements," International Journal of Geophysics, vol. 2019, pp. 1–15, 2019.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  M.Moradi, V.Alvarado and S.Huzurbazar, "Effect of salinity on water-in-crude oil emulsion: evaluation through drop-size distribution proxy," Energy & fuels, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 260–268, 2011.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  L. M.Prieto, M.Michelon, J.Burkert, S.Kalil and C.Burkert, "The production of rhamnolipid by a pseudomonas aeruginosa strain isolated from a southern coastal zone in brazil," Chemosphere, vol. 71, no. 9, p. 1781–1785, 2008.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed W.Karnanda, M. S.Benzagouta, A.AlQuraishi and M. M.Amro, "Effect of temperature, pressure, salinity, and surfactant concentration on IFT for surfactant flooding optimization," Arabian Journal of Geosciences, vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 3535–3544, 2013.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  A.Khusainova, A. A.Shapiro, E. H.Stenby and J. M.Woodley, Wettability improvement with enzymes: Application to enhanced oil recovery under conditions of the north sea reservoirs, Graduate Schools Yearbook2012, 2013.Google Scholar T.Moon, "Using enzymes to enhance oil recovery," SPE, 2008.Google Scholar Q.-x.Feng, F.Ni, D.Shao, X.-p.Ma, B.Qin and L.-H.a. J. C.-F.Zhou, "Eor pilot tests with modified enzyme," in EUROPEC/EAGE Conference and Exhibition Society of Petroleum Engineers, China, 2007.Google Scholar R. A.Copeland, Enzymes: a practical introduction to structure, mechanism, and data analysis, John Wiley and Sons, 2000.Google Scholar H.Nasiri, K.Spildo and A.Skauge, "Use of enzymes to improve waterflood performance," in Paper presented at International Symposium of the Society of Core Analysts, Noordwijk, Netherlands, 2009.Google Scholar P.Somasundaran and G. E.Agar, "The zero point of charge of calcite.," Journal of colloid interface science, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 433–440, 1967.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  A.Barati-Harooni, A.Najafi-Marghmaleki, S. M.Hosseini and S.Moradi, "Experimental Investigation of dynamic adsorption-desorption of new nonionic surfactant on carbonate rock: Application to enhanced oil recovery (EOR)," Journal of Energy Resources Technology, 139(4)., vol. 139, no. 4, 2017.Google Scholar T.Udoh, "Comparative Study on Adsorption of Biologically Generated Surface Active Agents on Carbonate and Sandstone Rock Surface," International Journal of Current Research and Academic Review, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 21–36, 2019.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS  T. H.Udoh and V.Ekanem, "Experimental Investigation of Greenzyme Adsorption on Sand Surface," ABUAD Journal of Engineering Research and Development, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 83–89, 2020.Google Scholar A.Rashidi, A. R. S.Nazar and H.Radnia, "Application of Nanoparticles for Chemical Enhanced Oil Recovery," Iranian Journal of Oil & Gas Science and Technology, vol. 7, no. 1, 2018.Google Scholar Beraet al. , "Characterization of Oil-Water Emulsion and Its Use in Enhanced Oil Recovery," Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., vol. 49, pp. 12756–12761, 2010.Google Scholar 




Copyright 2022, Society of Petroleum Engineers DOI 10.2118/211906-MS



